---
toc: true
layout: post
description: I try to join the tables, but things are not so smooth.
categories: [python, data science]
title: Analysing the movies I've watched, Part III, Joining the tables
---
## Other posts in series
{% for post in site.posts %}
{% if (post.title contains "Analysing the movies") and (post.title != page.title) %}
* [{{ post.title }}]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ post.url }})
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}

## Introduction
In the last post, I described the cleaning that I did, In particular, I had to manually correct over 140 titles in my data that did not occur in the imdb dataset. So I should be ready to join, right? No, of course not, why would things be so simple.

## The main problem
Many movie titles occur multiple times in the imdb database, and as far as I know, there is not an automated way to deal with this. To measure the extend of the problem, I added a column to count how many matches there are in the imdb database:

```python
def num_rows_in_imdb(movie_title, print_rows = False):
    """
    returns the number of rows in the imdb dataset that have primaryTitle equal to movie_title.
    if print_rows is True, then also print the rows
    """
    temp = imdb[imdb.primaryTitle == movie_title]
    num_rows = temp.shape[0]
    if print_rows:
        print(temp)
    return num_rows

df["rows_in_imdb"] = np.nan
df['rows_in_imdb'] = df.movie_title.map(num_rows_in_imdb)
```

Doing this revealed that most of the entries had multiple occuences in the imdb database! This was not good. I looked into a couple of examples by searching on the imdb website. It looked like many of the repetitions were from matches with TV episodes.  So I repeated the above process but with only the movies from the imdb dataset:

```python
imdb = pd.read_csv('title.basics.tsv',
                   sep="\t",
                   na_values = '\\N',
                   usecols = ['tconst', 'primaryTitle', 'startYear', 'titleType'])

imdb = imdb[imdb.titleType.isin(['short', 'movie', 'tvMovie'])]
```

By removing all the TV episodes, the number of matches decreased, but we still have a large problem. Only 351 of my entries have precisely one match. That is a low number indeed.


## Conclusion
I have decided to leave the dataset in the mess that it is and move onto the analysis stage. I will look for patterns within my dataframe first, and then look at those 351 entries which should be able to join with the imdb dataset for any patterns there.
